Enterprise Docs (#2390)
pomerium/pomerium: docs/enterprise/concepts.md

---
title: Concepts
sidebarDepth: 2
description: Learn how the Pomerium Enterprise Console works.
---

# Concepts

## Namespaces

> In the Pomerium Enterprise Console, a **Namespace** is a cornerstone organization unit. They are container objects, that behave similar to a unix directory structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Pomerium Enterprise Console, a **Namespace** is a cornerstone organization unit. They are container objects that behave similar to a unix directory structure.
```

> In each Namespace, you can define an organizational unit of users and groups with fine-grained access management. This enables teams to self-service the routes and policies pertinent to them. Namespaces can optionally inherit from their parent units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each Namespace, administrators can create organizational units where users and groups can be added. Namespaces enable fine-grained role based access control and management. The structure and hierarchy of namespaces empower teams to self-service the routes and policies pertinent to them. Namespaces can can also be used to optionally or mandatorily inherit from their parent permission or policies.
```

Needs a bit more but some tweaks

Namespaces enable:

- Self-Service.
- Hierarchical policy enforcement (both enforced, and optional),
- Policy organization.

> - RBAC for the Enterprise Console itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [RBAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Role-based_access_control) for the Enterprise Console itself.
```

Each of these sub-concepts are related and build on each other to form a unified security model.

> ### Self-Service Capabilities

Reviewer: I feel like a concrete example of how self-service could be used, and benefit folks would be helpful here.

Author: We have an example that covers self-service in the next section. I'm not yet sure if the example should be moved to this section, or just referenced (with or without link) here.

Reviewer: I think good as is given proximity.

One of the benefits of an identity-aware access proxy is that, once in place, developers and owners of enterprise applications have an incentive to configure their services to be accessible via the proxy.

Self-service has [several benefits](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/login/articles/login_winter16_05_cittadini.pdf):

- Frees global administrators from continuously modifying the configuration per user requests

> - Encourages service owners to own their configuration fragment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Encourages service owners to own their own route configuration and policy
```

- Ensures a reasonable compromise between development velocity and security controls

Unlike with a VPN, or network driven access control mechanisms, application owners (with limited access permissions managed through namespaces) can maintain route and policy configuration for their own services, while  higher level operations, security, and identity teams are able to enforce higher level authorization and access policies.

### Hierarchical Policy Enforcement

Hierarchical policy lets administrators enforce high level authorization policy. Policies can be optional (self-select), or mandatory.

> Identity and access is organized and controlled with Identity and Access Management (**IAM**) teams via your Identity Provider (**IdP**). These users and groups are read by Pomerium from your IdP, and used to determine top-level Namespace organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identity and access is organized and controlled with Identity and Access Management (**IAM**) teams via your Identity Provider (**IdP**). These users and groups are read by Pomerium from your IdP, and used to determine top-level Namespace organization.
```

I probably wrote them, but I don't follow those sentences. Maybe just delete?

Author: I updated your suggestion with a rewrite of that sentence that I _think_ makes it more clear. Thoughts?

Reviewer: 👍

> Consider this scenario: your organization has a security team managing high-level, course grain authorization controls. For example, they want to ensure that everyone with access to internal resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider this scenario: you want to enable your security team to manage high level corporate policy while enabling application owners to set finer grained user access to their specific applications. Pomerium can help you do that!

Your security team can enact top level security policies to ensure, everyone:
```

   - has a `yourcompany.com` email account,
   - isn't coming from a known bad actor IP address,

From there, the security team delegates management of child [Namespaces](#namespaces) to application teams, providing flexibility to self-manage their own application [Routes](#routes) and [Policies](#policies).

> For example, a developer group can be given control to determine who has access to their Namespace, and create or edit Routes within it. They can provide authentication to their WiP app without writing new authorization code. Meanwhile, the CFO is given [manager](#manager) permissions over the "Accounting" Namespace, and can set enforced or optional policies for the services within.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a developer group can be given control to determine who has access to their Namespace, and create or edit Routes within it. They can provide authentication to their WiP app without writing new authorization code. Meanwhile, the CFO is given [manager](#manager) permissions over the "Accounting" Namespace, and can set enforced or optional policies for the services within.
```
I'm confused about the connection between the CFO and the developer. Are these two distinct examples?

Author: Yes, they are distinct. I updated the suggestion to separate them, which should clarify this.

Reviewer: > authentication and authorization

Reviewer: LGTM otherwise.

### RBAC for Enterprise Console Users

- Namespaces are also used to achieve Role Based Access Control (**RBAC**) in the console itself.

> - There are three different roles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are four different roles:
```
 I guess it depends how you count Gust.

Author: When @travisgroth and I discussed it, we didn't consider Guest a role, but rather how a way to describe a user with no role.

#### Guest (no role)

Users who are authenticated by your IdP but do not have a role assigned in the Pomerium Console can still view the list of Namespaces, but nothing else.

#### Viewer

A user with the Viewer role can:

- view all resources in a Namespace (Routes, Policies, Certificates), including child Namespaces
- view traffic dashboard for routes in the Namespace, including child Namespaces
- view the activity log for a namespace.

#### Manager

> In addition to the access provided by the Viewer role, the Manager can create, read, update, and delete routes, policies, and certificates in a Namespace (as wel as its children). A Manager may also reference policies and certificates in the parent Namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the access provided by the Viewer role, a Manager can create, read, update, and delete routes, policies, and certificates in a Namespace (as well as its children). A Manager may also reference policies and certificates in the parent Namespace.
```

#### Admin

An Admin user has permissions across all Namespaces. They can manage global settings, sessions, and service accounts, as well as view events and runtime data.

## Users and Groups

> Pomerium populates users and groups from your IdP. This data is cached to prevent hitting API rate-limits, and provides look-ahead support when adding users or groups to [Namespaces](#namespaces) and [Policies](#policies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pomerium populates users and groups from your IdP. This data is cached to prevent hitting API rate-limits, ensure policy enforcement performance, and provides look-ahead support when adding users or groups to [Namespaces](#namespaces) and [Policies](#policies).
```

> ### Non-Domain Users

Reviewer: This feels more like a FAQ item than a concept. Not sure where to put it. Feels misplaced here.

Author: I agree. I suggest we leave it here for now, and move it once we have enough frequently asked questions to begin creating an FAQ page for Enterprise.

> When using Google as your IdP, you may hit an edge case where users are not available for lookup when the user's domain doesn't match that of your organization. In this case, there are two workarounds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You encounter a situation where you may want to add users that are not directly associated with your corporate identity provider service. For example, you have a corporate GSuite account and want to add a contractor with a gmail account. In this case, there are two workarounds:
```

Reviewer: Not quite right, but I think this exists outside of just google (github, gitlab) where users may or may not be part of your organization but there is a shared directory, but is certainly most common in google.

Reviewer: This may also be the case with Azure too; so best to just treat generically.

Author: edited to be _quite_ right, thanks!

> - Create a group with the non-domain users in it. This group can be found and added to Namespaces and Policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a group within your identity provider directly with the non-domain users in it. This group can be found and added to Namespaces and Policies.
```

> - Manually add the user's unique ID. Identify the ID from a user's Session Details page.

Reviewer: or from the console's session list page.

Author: Agreed, adding and crosslinking to `enterprise/reference/reports.md#sessions`

>    You can access the session details page from the 403 page, or by navigating to `/.pomerium` from any valid route. The unique ID is listed as "sub" under User Claims:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A user can see their session ID by navigating to the special `/.pomerium` URL endpoint from any Pomerium managed route. The unique ID is listed as "sub" under User Claims:
```

   ![The Session Details page, showing the "sub" data](./img/session-details.png)

## Service Accounts

> Service accounts provides bearer token based authentication for machine-to-machine communication through Pomerium to your protected endpoints. They can provide auth for monitoring services, create API integrations, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service accounts provides bearer token based authentication for machine-to-machine communication through Pomerium to your protected endpoints. They can provide auth for monitoring services, create API integrations, and other non-human driven scripts or services.
```

\cc @travisgroth  ; prefer not to say etc heh

> Service accounts can represent identities from your IdP or be Pomerium-only identities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service accounts can represent identities from your IdP or be Pomerium-only identities.
```

I don't know what this means? \cc @travisgroth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Service account identity can either be based on your IdP Directory or custom identities managed in a Pomerium Console [Namespace](#namespaces).
```

Reviewer: Is it based on your IdP directory, or based on a user (or group?); I guess I'm not clear on exactly what it's based on by reading this but maybe this is a me understanding thing.

Author: @desimone if _you_ don't understand it, it's bad docs. I think I can clarify:

```suggestion
A service account identity can either be based on a user entry in your IdP Directory, or exist as a custom identity managed in a Pomerium Console [Namespace](#namespaces).
```

Reviewer: I understand the updated.

## Routes

Routes define the connection pathway and configuration from the internet to your internal service. As a very basic level, a route sends traffic from `external-address.company.com` to `internalService-address.localdomain`, restricted by the policies associated with it, and encrypted by your TLS certificates. But more advanced configurations allow identity header pass-through, path and prefix rewrites, request and response header modification, load balancer services, and more.

### Protected Endpoints

This term refers to the system or service the route provides or restricts access to.

## Policies

> A Policy defines what permissions a set of users or groups has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Policy defines what who has access to what based on the identity of the user, her device, and the associated request context.
```

> Policies can be applied to [Routes](#routes) directly, or enforced within a [Namespace](#namespaces). This associates the set of permissions with a service or set of services, completing the authentication model.

Reviewer: ```
This associates the set of permissions with a service or set of services, completing the authorization model.
```

Not sure I follow.

Author: I think this was my take on your explanation of looking at the concepts as a whole. I'm trying to tie the concepts of policies, namespaces, and routes as part of the single model of authn/authz.

I'm happy to take any suggestions for rewriting that last sentence, or to just remove it.

> Policies can be applied to [Routes](#routes) directly, or enforced within a [Namespace](#namespaces). This associates the set of permissions with a service or set of services, completing the authentication model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies can be applied to [Routes](#routes) directly, or enforced within a [Namespace](#namespaces). Policies allow operators to add authorization and access control to a single, or collection of routes.
```

Reviewer: Maybe?

Pomerium provides a standardized interface to add access control, regardless if an application itself has authorization or authentication baked in, so developers can focus on their app's functionality, not reinventing access control.

### Authentication

Pomerium provides authentication via your existing identity provider (Pomerium supports all major [single sign-on](/docs/identity-providers/) providers (Okta, G Suite, Azure, AD, Ping, Github and so on).

### Authorization

Authorization policy can be expressed in a high-level, [declarative language](/enterprise/reference/manage.html#pomerium-policy-language) or [as code](/enterprise/reference/manage.html#rego) that can be used to enforce ABAC, RBAC, or any other governance policy controls. Pomerium can make holistic policy and authorization decisions using external data and request context factors such as user groups, roles, time, day, location and vulnerability status.

Trust flows from identity, device-state, and context, not network location. Every device, user, and application's communication should be authenticated, authorized, and encrypted.

> Authorization is where Pomerium's value proposition really lies. With Pomerium:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Pomerium:
```

Reviewer: I hate my words.

---
title: Concepts
sidebarDepth: 1
description: Learn how the Pomerium Enterprise Console works.
---

# Concepts

## Namespaces

> In the Pomerium Enterprise Console, a namespace is where you can define an organizational unit of users and groups with fine-grained access management. This enables teams to self-service the routes and policies pertinent to them. Namespaces can optionally inherit from their parent units.

Reviewer 2: Should make mention of routes, policies, etc being contained within them as well.  Broadly, they contain resources which you can delegate control over.

## Service Accounts

> Service accounts handle machine-to-machine communication from Pomerium to your Identity Provider (**IdP**) in order to retrieve and establish group membership. Configuration is largely dependent on the IdP, but is usually an API acccess token with sufficient privlidges to read users and groups.

Reviewer 2: Service accounts in the console context are to facilitate machine-to-machine _through_ the pomerium proxy.  Most concrete use case is interacting with the console API but other programmatic access to systems behind the proxy are supported.  

Examples would be monitoring systems, API integrations, etc.

## Routes

Unlike the open-source Pomerium configuration, access is not defined alongside routing. Instead, authorization is configured by attaching [policies](#policies) to a route.

## Policies

> In the open-source Pomerium config, routes and policies are configured in a single block, under `policy`:

Reviewer 2: Should update this given recent changes from https://github.com/pomerium/pomerium/pull/2401.  We will be shifting this syntax under the `routes` block.

Author: IMHO, I should have been tagged on #2401 and updated the existing docs as part of the PR before it was merged.

It's not done until it's documented.

```yaml
policy:
  - from: https://code.corp.domain.example
    to: http://codeserver:8080
    allowed_users:
      - some.user@domain.example
    allow_websockets: true
```

> In the Pomerium Enterprise Console, [routes](#routes) and policies are separate entities. This allows for both easier and more fine-grained access control, as policies can be defined once, optionally associated under a [Namespace](#namespaces), and attached to one or more routes. Routes can also inherit policies from their parent Namespace <!-- @Travis please confirm -->.

Author: But no longer relevant due to #2401 I believe.
